---
title: Proposal - Identifying useful quantum defects in materials using AI
date: February 15, 2019
---

Defects in crystalline materials have opened the door to a whole new world of possibilities for classical and quantum computing, but remain a key challenge for systematic discovery with the tools of computational materials science. Can Artificial Intelligence accelerate scientific exploration of this technologically critical space? Can it recommend promising candidates for experimental verification?

AI has come on par with human intelligence in board games like Go[^1] and strategic e-sports like Starcraft[^2]. Can it do the same with scientific discovery? Machine Learning (a subset of AI) have helped scientists find unseen patterns in big data to improve business across various industries. Possibly, AI can inform science in a similar, but potentially much more revolutionary way. The scientific community has generated huge repositories of knowledge in the last few centuries, and humans generally take considerable time to aggregate them before applying. It’s an open challenge for AI to aggregate unstructured knowledge as reliably as a human expert, integrate concepts from different scientific fields and assist (or even collaborate with) human experts in research.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/qc-defect.png" caption="" %}

Material science and engineering stands at the core of technological quest, as new materials often catalyze a plethora of inventions. Machine learning has already been used to accelerate materials discovery[^3]. Its pattern recognition capability has enabled predicting various material properties without carrying out every expensive computer simulation or physical experiment. Instead of simply saving computational effort, there is a need for AI to assist scientists in solving more challenging problems. In the electronic space, materials can be engineered at the atomistic scale. It has been found that introduction of point defects in otherwise perfect crystals can help design devices for electrical, optical and quantum computing applications.

Three dimensional and two dimensional forms of single and multi component semiconductors are engineered using point defects for electronic applications. Ionisation energy, carrier density, carrier type can be tuned using different combination of point defect types, semiconductors and substrate[^4]. Such defect engineering have created promising candidates for quantum and neuro-morphic computing. These experimental discoveries are generally validated using calculations based on first principle methods. Electronic-structure calculations of defective crystals are computationally expensive, which limits exploration of all possibilities. Researchers often use physical laws, knowledge from well-explored material systems to narrow down the options. This has created pockets of knowledge in the defects community, and cross pollination must happen to accelerate the development. AI has the capability of churning through these pockets of knowledge to get familiar with all explored defect configurations and their properties. On learning the structure-property relationships, this system can possibly recommend unexplored but promising candidates for a given electronic property and possibly carry out first-principle calculations to validate its own recommendation. AI must be taught the fundamental scientific concepts to make the aforementioned recommender engine applicable across different material properties. GANs have been shown to organize the objects in images into concepts[^5], which creates a hope that AI can be taught scientific concepts too.

[^1]: [Silver D, Schrittwieser J, Simonyan K et al. Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge. Nature 550, 354–359 (2017)](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24270)
[^2]: [Oriol V et. al. AlphaStar: Mastering the Real-Time Strategy Game StartCraft II; DeepMind 2019](https://deepmind.com/blog/article/alphastar-mastering-real-time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii)
[^3]: [Butler KT, Davies DW, Cartwright H, Isayev O, Walsh A. Machine learning for molecular and materials science. Nature. 2018;559(7715):547-555](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0337-2)
[^4]: [Wang D, Xian-Bin L, Dong H, Wei Quan T, Hong-Bo S. Engineering two-dimensional electronics by semiconductor defects. Nano Today, 16, October 2017, 30-45](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2017.07.001)
[^5]: [David B et.al. GAN dissection: Visualizing and understanding generative adversarial networks. arXiv 2018.](https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.10597v2)
