---
title: Robocon 2014 - the most memorable project
date: March 2014
category: robotics
classes: wide
---

Asia-Pacific Broadcasting Unit (ABU) organizes international robotic tournament for undergraduate engineering students every year. The participating teams have to design and fabricate robots to perform a given set of tasks (which changes every year) while adhering to the certain constraints in the robot's dimensions and capabilities. Each match in the tournament is played with two teams. The team completing the most number of tasks or completing all of them in the shortest time wins the match. The team which survives all the league and knock-out rounds wins the trophy. Every country organizes a similar tournament to select their best college team for the international leg. In India, Doordarshan (national television) started organizing and broadcasting the DD-ROBOCON from 2002, the same year ABU ROBOCON was initiated.

In 2014, the theme of the competition was set as __Salute to Parenthood__. The problem statement required two robots - a parent and a child. The parent robot must carry the child robot across the game arena (simulating a kids' playground) where the four tasks (simulating different recreation equipments) have to be performed by the child robot with or without the parent's assistance. Watch this video of the [problem statement](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GchwbtfqDzc) to know more.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/r14_banner.png" caption="Team banner of IIT Madras (designed by a team member - Animesh Bagora)" %}

IIT Madras, being one of the premier engineering institution in India, has been sending student teams to DD-Robocon since 2010 (if I'm not wrong). [Center for Innovation](http://cfi.iitm.ac.in/wordpress), the student-run lab of IIT Madras, sponsors teams for such national and international competitions. Second-year (sophomore) undergrads, interested in joining the coveted team, are assigned simpler projects in their summer break to give them a taste and gauge their motivation to design and fabricate working robots. A group of students selected from this pool of summer projects finally represent the institute at ROBOCON. The problem statement is typically released in August whereas the national and international tournament are held in March and August of the following year, respectively. I was selected in the mechanical design and fabrication sub-team, and was also entrusted with handling the accounts of the team.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/r14_team.jpg" caption="Team members at 2014 Robocon India, Pune" %}

Our team (in the picture above) of around 30 students spent all their spare time from coursework for the next 8 months (from August 2013 to March 2014) in designing, fabricating, testing and iterating the two robots. We had students from all departments - mechanical, electrical, materials, physics - who collaborated to put their best foot in performing a daunting task. Being in the mechanical design sub-team, I was specifically responsible for the designing the suspension systems and fabricating them from aluminum plates using CNC milling. The suspension system had to absorb all the jerks to ensure keep the wheels of the parent robot grounded.

<!-- image of transwheel or suspension systems -->

As we started running out of funds, we approached private sponsors to support us in cash or kind. First, we targeted companies which manufactured parts useful for our robots.

I got exposure to numerous aspects of working on hardware projects:

- Designing: CAD, simulation, iterative design
- Fabrication: milling, lathe, CNC, tapping, drilling, sawing, welding, riveting, painting
- Pneumatic circuits, pistons, valves, pressurized containers, leak prevention, vacuum pumps, suction cups
- Accounting, inventory management
- Procurement, negotiation
- Marketing, attracting sponsors
- Crisis management

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/r14_bots.jpg" caption="The two robots - the autonomous child and the semi-autonomous parent (right)" %}
