---
title: Why is everyone talking about Bitcoin?
date: December 21, 2017
category: bitcoin
---

Bitcoin is the first cryptocurrency based on blockchain technology. Invented in 2009, price of one bitcoin (BTC) increased drastically in the last few months. Now, it is anticipated that this blockchain technology will disrupt the payment space and thus everyone is buying it to make money when the disruption takes place. Let me give briefly describe the technology behind BTC and its pros and cons.

Using the blockchain technology, all transactions are made using hash keys based on SHA256 algorithm and verified by miners all around the world (but mostly in China). Anyone can transfer BTC to anyone in the world via internet. There are no restrictions based on geographical/political locations. However, transactions are not free. Miners, who own expensive computers, charge a certain fees for verifying the transaction. This fees is based on the priority level (mentioned by the payee) and time taken to complete the transaction can range from 30 minutes to few hours based on the priority level. Currently, BTC is experiencing a lot of traffic which has led to increased transaction fees and time. Developers are working on the project to improve the capacity. The code behind BTC is open-source and you can also start contributing on [GitHub](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin).

With increasing public interest in BTC and other cryptocurrencies, many exchanges and trading platforms have opened up on the internet. It has become fairly easy to buy BTC using fiat currencies like USD, GBP, EUR. However, BTC is also considered a bubble in the making by many trading professionals and are being compared with the internet bubble. The prices are very volatile and it is highly recommended to read about this technology before investing. Even if you are convinced about the potential of BTC, you should not invest more than you can afford to lose. All the professional traders who are investing in BTC, are avoiding to give financial advice to do the same.