---
title: Desire to learn music
date: December 02, 2018
---

I was introduced to musical arts in the 4th standard of my school. I chose tabla over singing and dance for various reasons. Dance was perceived as meant only for girls. Singing was over-crowded and the singing teacher was infamous for using a stick on bad singers. Tabla was also my mother's favorite instrument. Maybe she had envisioned her son as a tabla star.

For those who don't know what tabla is, it is no where close to a table. It's a set of two drums of different diameter, one for base and other for treble, and it is played using bare hands while sitting on the ground. I learnt all the basic language of tabla called 'bols' and was pretty good at it. I used to practice those 'bols' on all hard surfaces which could make sound, which became irritating for my parents in few months. So they bought me a tabla to practice on. I also started taking private lessons from one of my neighbours. However, all the enthusiasm ended abruptly and my tabla is still lying untouched (or un-banged) for many years in one of the top shelves of my home. I completed my schooling and joined an engineering college in Chennai.

In college, one of the seniors during the 'introductory' sessions ordered all the freshies to learn at least on musical instrument before graduating. His insti-name was "Flute" for obvious reasons. I tried fulfilling his orders by borrowing guitar from my friend Yuvraj (who had already gave up after investing in that instrument). I learnt couple of basic chords but could not become disciplined enough to practice regularly.