---
date: June 9, 2020
title: Venturing into 3D printing
---

After enough thought over a choosing a summer activity, I finally decided to buy a 3D printer. I also convinced my roommate, Gopal, to chime in so that we can have some fun together. Based on the blog [ctrlpew.com](https://ctrlpew.com) and few Google searches, I found that Creality Ender 3 is the best 3D printer for beginners like me. Ctrlpew.com had given me a shopping list:
1. Ender 3 (or its pro version)
2. One or two PLA spools
3. Vernier calipers (for measurement)

## Ordering on Wednesday
To save money and get fastest delivery, I scanned few websites to order Ender 3. Amazon (the go-to online store) was offering it at higher price than the official website (creality3d.com), but it was out of stock there. Aliexpress, which I thought delivers only in China, was offering a competitive price and delivery in 2-5 days. Surprisingly the source was also in US. I ordered the package with 2 extra PLA spools which seemed cheaper than ordering them seperately. Gopal ordered a cheap pair of calipers from Amazon.

## Delivery and Assembly on Friday
The printer arrived on the best day of the week - Friday. After concluding all the meetings and research commitments of the week, it was a pleasant surprise to read the deliver email from AliExpress that the Ender 3 was already delivered on Friday afternoon. I brought it inside at around 5 in the evening and started unpacking it right away. It took two of us more than an hour to decipher the instruction manual and screw all the struts and parts in place with their matching hex-bolts. The instructions were very clear and the struts weren't marked. Especially we struggled with finding the correct way to fix the horizontal struct to the X-axis motor. Since it was the first 3D printer for both of us, we made a rookie mistake.

We forgot to pass the power cables of extruder between the two horizontal struts. This cable could touch the printing bed and collide with the model while printing. To fix this, we had to remove the top strut, move the lower strut with the Z-screwguide and move the cable. It wasn't too much  hassle.

## Loading/changing the filament
Loading the filament is quite easy. One has to press the extruder lever to create a gap between the two driving gears and insert the filament. The extruder hot end should be hot enough while the filament is pushed. Push the filament till you see the filament oozing out of the hot end

Similarly, the filament can only be changed when the extruder is hot. Activating the "Change filament" option from the printer panel retracts the filament from the hot end. The filament can then be withdrawn while pushing the spring loaded lever on the cold end. Filament can be changed between a printing job. Filament must be changed before its free end passes the cold end, the printer will create defects in the model.

## Second and third prints

I printed the other two Gcode provided in the SD card, namely the cat and the pig. Cat is very intricately designed and took almost 6 hours to print. The pig is actually a hollow piggy bang which took around 4 hours.  It seems like that the features on all three models and their respective slicer settings are meant to show off the best possible print quality of Ender 3.

## Learning CAD
To create any model from scratch, one must know create it using CAD (computer aided design) software. I learnt CAD during my engineering undergrad, using Autodesk's AutoCAD and have used 3DS' Solidworks for few projects. I think I should be able to easily pick it back up. Among the 3D printing community, Autodesk Fusion 360 (proprietary) and Blender (open-source) are two popular CAD softwares.

Fusion 3D is primarily focused towares precise engineering drawings. It is freely available for students but it can't be installed on personal device. I installed free-trial version instead, and it is quite intuitive. Blender is primarily targeted towards animators and artists. Although there are articles stating that it can be used for 3D printing, it's not as intuitive as other CAD software. I went through few Blender lessons to make a donut but it has too many hot-keys. Blender crashes abruptly while using whereas Fusion 360 seems stable.

Both the softwares have their purpose. Fusion 360 (and similar CAD focused softwares) are meant for useful models where precision is paramount. Blender is meant to create artistic models which may be useful in designing gifts. I wonder if a drawing from one software can be imported into another to exploit their capabilities.

## Slicer with Cura
Before passing on the design to the 3D printer, the CAD file must be sliced in a software. Ultimaker's Cura is one of most popular free slicer available. This software generates the machine readable Gcode for printing any model. The Gcode controls the motion of all motors, fan speeds and temperature. This software can identify overhangs and add supports. The printing pattern is algorithmically calculated by the slicer. This also provides a preview of the printing process and provides an estimate of print duration. There are several settings available during slicing which can tilt the balance between print quality and duration. Layer height and infill density are the most basic parameters. I don't know if these softwares share the same capabilities or there are minor differences.

## Thingiverse
This is a repository of community sourced 3D models, free to download and print. Started by Makerbot, it is the most popular repository, where people upload designs, share their printing experience and iterate their designs.

## [All3DP.com](https://all3dp.com/)

This website is a dedicated towards 3D printing. It has articles on various printers, softwares and techniques commonly used in 3D printing. THe language is vert approachable and beginner-friendly. For technical people like me, it could be a too simple at times but it gives a good introduction to the 3D printing world. It runs on advertisements which could be annoying.

"Printing model a day keeps boredom away"

## So many youtubers
The consumer grade 3D printing technology is at least 10 years old, and it's getting cheaper every year. This has lowered the entry barrier for many content creators for monetosing their CAD and tinkering skills. Even a small fraction of such creators who have started YouTube channels is a significant number.

## 3D benchy

With standard slicing settings of 0.2 mm layer height and 20% infill density, the boat had few imperfections. The bottom layer had a weird gap which could be due to filament getting stuck at the newly installed filament guide. The circles weren't perfect and the text on the back is barely legible. The text at the bottom is legible but it could be better. The slanted roof and rails have distinct steps. Although I could see some features at the top of doors and windows, the overhangs came out pretty neat. I should try smaller layer heights.

## Reading Gcode

Comparing with the cat model, the features on the 3Dbenchy were disappointing. So, I wanted to investigate. I opened the Gcode files of these two models hoping to find slicing settings. I was not disappointed. There's a long list of settings on the top of the file. I guess the comments in Gcode start with a semicolon.

## Calibration cube
The measurements are variable but more or less within tolerances of 0.25 mm in X and Y direction, and 0.05 mm in Z direction.

## Should I write about every print and document the lessons learnt
There are many things to care about, lot of moving parts, several settings to play with and uncountable questions to answer. How should I document all the lessons learnt, so that I can avoid repeating mistakes and pass on the data to someone else (or my future self). Blogging is one way. I can write private notes instead.

## Liverpool bird logo (supports)
When my friends visited me over the weekend, they requested a Liverpool bird logo. I started printing a neat model found on Thingiverse. I forgot about overhangs and didn't add any support. I caught the printer attempting to print overhanging parts of LFC in the air creating nothing more than hanging strings. I stopped it after realising my mistake and decided to print it later by laying it flat.

## Batman logo
I printed the flat 2mm thick batman logo (or batarang) with standard 0.2 mm layer height. It was a short 40 min job with neat edges. I should look for settings to improve the top and bottom finish.

## Filament guide
Among a huge array of Ender 3 upgrades available on Thingiverse, I chose to start with the most popular one: the [filament guide](https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:2917932). It comes in two parts: the bottom part replaces the strut cap and holds the guide arm (second part). It took around 30 mins to print the bottom part with 0.2 mm layer height and 20% infill density. Teflon tube or tape might help reduce friction between this guide and filament.

## Hardware vs Software settings
There are several settings on the hardware and software side which can affect the tradeoff between quality and print duration. On the hardware side, there are:
1. Stepper motor settings in each direction (steps/mm)
2. Bed and nozzle temperature
3. Nozzle size

On the software side, there are many more settings. The important ones are:
1. Layer height
2. Infill density
3. Fan speed

# So many things to try
- Long list of advanced/expert slicer settings
- Rafts
- Infill pattern
- Can it print circles in a spiral pattern to avoid creating a boundary.
- Maximum height
- Vase pattern
- Glass bed

<!-- # Using calipers (good old highschool days) -->